You'll need some basic competency with `ssh` to get onto the UF Astro network. See the department handbook at `http://astro.ufl.edu/it/handbook`.

Once you've connected, you'll see a prompt that looks like `login[~] `. You can't really do much from the login machine, so you want to connect to some other machine. For now you can use `ast-vega`, but you should consult with the group you're working with and use whatever computers the PI owns. ast-vega is a little computer that sits next to my desk, I only use it to get files on and off the network via USB. From here you can run `python`, but that's not the version of Python you want. The operating system installed on all these machines inclues Python 2.6, which is not what you want to use. There is a Python 2.7 anaconda installation at `/usr/local/anaconda/bin/`, and I have also installed Python 3.5 on a network location that I own, `/astro/data/et4/kimockb/anaconda3/bin/`. You can make either installation take precedence over 2.6 by prepending (as opposed to appending) the appropriate path to your PATH variable.

The default shell on the network is called tcsh. This is the program that actually processes the text you type into a terminal. There are loads shells to choose from, but the network also comes with bash, which is usually used over tcsh. I messed around with the default shell program and strange stuff started happening. If you know what you're doing feel free to change it to bash, but I just modified my startup script for tcsh to invoke bash. Then since bash is started, I put all my settings in the bash startup script.

If you want, you can just copy the files `.bashrc` and `.cshrc` from `/astro/homes/kimockb/` to your home directory to get my settings. You can also edit your own files. To do this you'll either need to use a terminal-based text editor or find a networked department computer that you can use to log in without an ssh terminal.

From the terminal, get onto `login`, then `ssh ast-vega`. You will be in your home directory. From there you can `nano .cshrc`. This will bring up a text editor. Arrow keys work just fine but the mouse won't. Move down to the end of the file and make a new line that just says `bash`. Press `ctrl + o` to write out, hit enter to confirm the file name to write to, then `ctrl + x` to close nano. Now `nano .bashrc`, and add a new line that says `export PATH="/user/local/anaconda/bin:$PATH"` or `export PATH="/astro/data/et4/kimockb/anaconda3/bin/"` if you want to use my Python 3.5 installation. Write out and close, then disconnect by pressing `ctrl+d` to close your ssh connection from login to ast-vega, then again to close your connection from your local machine to login.

Now when you connect with ssh you should see a slightly different prompt, and running `python` should tell you that you're running a version of Anaconda Python.

If you're going to be working on the network often you may also find it helpful to copy the `.nanorc` and `python.nanorc` files from `/astro/homes/kimockb/`. The combination of those two will provide you with nice syntax highlighting and a proper editor configuration for nano.

Getting your files on and off the network can be a whole other mess. For getting code onto multiple machines I strongly suggest using `git`, which is installed on all the network machines.
